Dear Editors,

Please see enclosed our manuscript "Analysis-ready VCF at Biobank scale using
Zarr" which addresses critical problems in the storage and analysis of the very
large genetic variation datasets currently available. These biobank-scale
datasets have been collected on a national level through initiatives such as
the UK Biobank, and comprise hundreds of thousands of whole genome sequences.
The standard file format for representing genetic variation data, the Variant Call
Format (VCF), was developed during the 1000 Genomes project and emphasises
simplicity and ease of analysis through sequential pipelines. We demonstrate
that this approach is wholly unsuitable for current datasets and the realities
of contemporary cloud-based computing, and that VCF is now a major
computational bottleneck. Moreover, we show that any method of representing
VCF data that shares its row-wise arrangement of data (and many have been
proposed) is also fundamentally inefficient in accessing individual fields or
subsets of the samples.

We argue that storage of large-scale VCF data is much more suited to 
array (or "tensor") storage, where fields are stored separately as 
multidimensional arrays, and in favour of the widely-used Zarr
format. We present the VCF Zarr specification that losslessly
maps VCF data into this array-oriented format, and the vcf2zarr program
that performs the conversion in a reliable and scalable manner. We show
that this approach is competitive with state of the art file-based approaches 
in terms of compression ratios and sequential processing performance,
while having far superior performance when accessing subsets of the 
data. We emphasise that Zarr is also suitable for deployment in cloud object stores and 
distributed computation, and therefore intrinsically far more scalable than
current file-based methods.

We believe that GigaScience is the ideal venue for this manuscript for several
reasons. Firstly, storing and analysing the vast genomic datasets currently
available is a key challenge in biomedical big data, and of core interest to
the readers of GigaScience. Secondly, several of the key contributions related
to storing and processing genetic variation data cited here have been published
in GigaScience (Second-generation PLINK: rising to the challenge of larger and
richer datasets. Gigascience 2015; HTSlib: C library for reading/writing
high-throughput sequencing data. Gigascience 2021; Twelve years of SAMtools and
BCFtools. Gigascience 2021; DivBrowse–interactive visualization and exploratory
data analysis of variant call matrices. GigaScience 2023). Thirdly, we share a
belief in the importance of open and FAIR data that are a core principle for
GigaScience, and argue that our approach lays the foundations for a FAIR and
equitable representation of genetic variation data.

We hope that the combination of illustrative simulation-based benchmarks along
with our real-world example using the Genomics England dataset will convince
readers of the transformative potential of Zarr, and catalyse the development
of a new generation of cloud-based variant processing tools using an efficient,
FAIR data representation.

We would suggest the following reviewers:


- Brent Pedersen (bpederse@gmail.com). Author of cyvcf2, slivar and several
  other popular VCF processing tools. 
  GitHub profile: https://github.com/brentp

- Josh Moore (josh@openmicroscopy.org). First author of OME-Zarr paper.
  ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4028-811X

- Patrick König (koenig@ipk-gatersleben.de). First author of DivBrowse 
  GigaScience paper which also represents genetic variation data using Zarr.

- John Marshall (jmarshall@hey.com). htslib core developer; author on
  GigaScience HTSlib paper. Email address is associated with GitHub
  account: https://github.com/jmarshall
